Hound is a hunting dog especially used for scent tracking. Some may use the term hound as a general word to mean dog.

Canine is a scientific synonym for dog, originates from the term Canidae which groups certain carnivorous species.

Mongrel is a dog that is not a pure breed.

Pooch is a casual synonym for dog.

Fido is a casual synonym for dog as it is a common name for a male dog.

Doggo is a casual synonym for dog often used on social media.

Cur is a negative synonym for dog. Some may use this to depict a scruffy dog or a mixed breed.

Tyke is a synonym for mongrel, it means a mixed breed dog.

Bitch is a female dog.

Whelp is the term whelp is a synonym for puppy, whereas the term whelping means a dog giving birth.

Guard Hairs refers to the outer fur of your dog, it is longer and often stiff.

A double coat consists of two layers, a thick undercoat and a fluffy top coat with the top layer consisting of guard hairs.

A single coat is a coat layer consisting of all guard hairs covering the dog’s body.

Feathered refers to dogs have short and sometimes coarse fur with long fringes on their legs, ears, and stomach.

An undercoat can only be found in dogs with double coats. This refers to the first, more coarse coat under the guard hairs.

Flag refers to feathering on the tail, this will be visible from the base to the tip of the tail.

The mane is when a dog has long hair on their chest and neck which joins together.

The plume is long fringing on your dog’s tail.

Ruff is the coarse fur located around your dog’s face and neck. The face is often said to have this fur surrounding the facial features in particular as opposed to random placement.

Topknot refers to long and soft hair on top of the dog’s head.

Standoff Coat is a double coat with much stiffer fur on the outer layer.

Smooth-coated dogs have a short and sleek coat that lies close to your dog’s skin and body.

Wire-Haired refers to a combination of a coarse outer layer and a soft inner layer.

Jacket refer to the external layer of fur on your dog often refers to the area on the body in particular.